Finishing the Fight Against COVID-19
Leadership should always be about putting peoples’ health and safety first. Canadians have 
sacrificed so much over the pandemic and have stepped up to protect themselves and their 
communities by getting their shots. Colder weather is just around the corner. Canadians have a 
choice: continue taking action to finish the fight against COVID-19 now or risk a fall and winter 
with more lockdowns and the tragedy of more lives lost. Canadians have made too many 
sacrifices to get this far. Canadians deserve a government that will get us through this crisis, not 
take us backward.
A Vaccine Strategy to Save Lives
Vaccination is our best line of defence against COVID-19 
and variants of concern. It not only protects those who 
are vaccinated but protects those who can’t get 
vaccinated, like young children. That is why the Liberal 
government worked tirelessly to secure enough doses for 
every Canadian citizen, securing our supply well in 
advance of our initial target. And it is why we support 
provinces, territories, and Indigenous communities in 
rolling out one of the most successful vaccination 
campaigns in the world.
But the pandemic isn’t over. If we don’t keep up the fight 
against COVID-19, our hard-won gains could be lost.
Erin O’Toole won’t listen to the experts on vaccinations. 
He would let unvaccinated people travel on trains and 
planes. We need leadership to get us through this crisis 
and get the job done on vaccines, and Erin O’Toole won’t 
deliver that.
Mandatory Vaccination 
To finish the fight against COVID-19, protect people at 
work, ensure businesses can get back up to speed, and, 
most importantly, make sure our kids can safely return to 
school, we need to do everything we can to keep public 
spaces safe. 
A re-elected Liberal government will:
• Require that travellers on interprovincial trains, 
commercial flights, cruise ships, and other federally 
regulated vessels be vaccinated.
• Ensure vaccination across the federal public service. 
As the country’s largest employer, this will protect 
the health and safety of the federal public servants 
and their communities, across Canada.
• We will also keep working with employers in Crown 
corporations and federally regulated workplaces to 
ensure vaccination is prioritized for workers in these 
sectors.
Proof of Vaccination
Canadians want to finish the fight against COVID-19. 
Millions of Canadians have rolled up their sleeves and 
gotten their vaccine shots, doing so to protect themselves, 
and their community. Across the country, thousands of 
business owners have demonstrated leadership to support 
vaccine rollout, and now many want to go further. 
Whether they are managing a multinational or a small 
coffee shop, business owners should have no doubt that 
putting the safety of workers, customers, or clients first is 
the right thing to do.
Proof of vaccination systems give people the confidence 
of knowing that others around them are fully vaccinated.
They also help drive increased vaccination rates and give 
Canadians confidence that it’s safe to go to restaurants, 
shops, and out into their communities.
A re-elected Liberal government will:
• Launch a $1 billion COVID-19 Proof of Vaccination 
Fund to support provinces and territories who 
implement a requirement for proof of vaccine 
credentials in their jurisdiction for non-essential 
businesses and public spaces.
• Table legislation to ensure that every business and 
organization that decides to require a proof of 
vaccination from employees and customers can do 
so without fear of a legal challenge.
Free COVID-19 Vaccine Boosters
As the public health situation evolves, keeping Canadians 
safe and healthy is our priority and we are committed to 
finishing the fight against COVID-19. 
A re-elected Liberal government will:
• Procure enough vaccines to ensure all Canadians 
have access to free COVID-19 booster shots and 
second-generation vaccines as needed.
Forward. For Everyone. 3
A COVID-19 Research Fund
COVID-19 is a new disease and scientists and researchers 
have come a long way to understand, treat, and prevent it.
But we still need to understand its long-term impacts.
A re-elected Liberal government will:
• Invest $100 million to study the long-term health 
impacts of COVID-19, including the effects of “longCOVID” on different groups, including vulnerable 
populations and children.
A Health Care System, For Everyone
Canadians are proud to have a public health care system 
that is a model to the world. That didn’t happen by 
accident. It is the result of Canadians’ belief that we take 
care of each other. Accessible, well-funded public health 
care is a cornerstone of equality in Canada. And it has 
been invaluable as we have fought the pandemic. We
cannot take our public health care system for granted.
From day one of the pandemic, we made significant 
investments to ensure Canadians have the health care 
they need. Eight out of every 10 dollars spent in response 
to COVID-19 came from the Liberal government. From 
investing in pandemic surge capacity, public health care 
and the Safe Restart Agreement, to moving forward on 
pharmacare and procuring vaccines for every single 
Canadian, we have had Canadians’ backs.
Key Actions to Build a Better Health Care 
System, Since 2015
Injected $4.5 billion in one-time top-ups to the Canada 
Health Transfer since the pandemic started, to help 
address the extreme pressures that COVID-19 has put 
on our health systems and reduce backlogs. 
Provided provinces and territories with $1 billion to 
support vaccine rollout campaigns so Canadians could 
get their first and second doses as quickly as possible.
Invested an additional $6 billion in home care and 
community care, as well as palliative care services.
Invested more than $600 million to address the opioid 
crisis and improve access to treatment.
Signed the first provincial-territorial agreement to 
accelerate the implementation of national universal 
pharmacare as we continue to move forward with new 
partners and funded a $500 million a year national 
strategy for high-cost drugs for rare diseases. 
Eliminating the Backlog of Surgeries and 
Procedures 
Too many Canadians had their care deferred during the 
pandemic, resulting in a significant backlog of surgeries, 
procedures, and diagnostics. But waitlists from before the 
pandemic persist as well. People are waiting longer for 
important services like MRIs and ultrasounds. 
A re-elected Liberal government will:
• Immediately invest $6 billion—on top of $4 billion 
already committed—to support the elimination of 
health system waitlists. 
• Negotiate agreements with every province and 
territory to ensure that Canadians who are waiting 
for care get the treatment they need as quickly as 
possible, and that the primary care system is 
positioned for the future and able to deliver the care 
outcomes that Canadians need.
Making Sure Every Canadian Has Access to a 
Family Doctor or Primary Health Team
Millions of Canadians face problems accessing primary 
care. We want to help solve this problem and improve 
Canadians' access to universal, public health care.
A re-elected Liberal government will:
• Provide $3.2 billion to the provinces and territories 
for the hiring of 7,500 new family doctors, nurses,
and nurse practitioners. 
Expanding Virtual Health Care Services 
The pandemic has sparked a transformation in how health 
care is delivered and how people access it, with more and 
more tools accessible for virtual care. We have dedicated
$240.5 million to increasing access to virtual care in the 
pandemic. But we want to and will help ensure that the 
fast acceleration of care into virtual models is thoughtful 
and delivers the quality of care Canadians deserve.
A re-elected Liberal government will:
• Provide $400 million over 4 years to build on the 
growing demand for virtual care that arose during 
the pandemic. 
These dollars will help to cover digital infrastructure, and 
other system improvements, to support more virtual care
so that Canadians can access things like virtual medical 
consultations with doctors and nurses or remote 
monitoring. 
Forward. For Everyone. 4
Increasing Rural and Underserved 
Communities’ Access to Health Care 
Rural Canadians have significantly less access to doctors 
than Canadians in urban settings.
A re-elected Liberal government will:
• Expand the number of family doctors and primary 
health teams in rural communities, by increasing by 
50% (from $40,000 up to $60,000 over 5 years), the 
maximum debt relief that family doctors, residents in 
family medicine, nurse practitioners, or nurses are 
eligible for the under Canada Student Loans 
forgiveness program. 
• Expand the list of professionals eligible for 
forgiveness to include dentists, pharmacists, dental 
hygienists, midwives, social workers, psychologists, 
teachers, and early childhood educators so that rural 
communities have greater access to the full suite of 
health and social service providers they need. 
• Offer health care professionals, who are just starting 
out in their careers, a one-time income tax 
deduction of up to $15,000 over their first 3 years 
of practice to help with the costs of setting up a 
practice. 
• Undertake a review to ensure that communities that 
are indeed rural are fully eligible under the program.
Standing up for Universal Public Health Care
Canadians cherish their universal, publicly funded health 
care system. Erin O’Toole says he wants to bring 
“innovation” to this system by allowing those with money 
to access their own system of for-profit, private care. A 
two-tier system would worsen access and health 
outcomes for all of us.
Liberals believe that innovation in health care comes not 
from letting wealthy people cut the line, but by improving 
and expanding our public health care system. We have 
opposed extra billings and enforced the Canada Health Act
on provinces who have promoted this practice.
A re-elected Liberal government will:
• Strengthen federal powers under the Canada Health 
Act and the Federal-Provincial Fiscal Arrangements Act
to deduct health transfers from provinces who 
enable extra billing for publicly insured services, in 
order to protect the integrity of our universal public 
health care system.
Protecting Your Sexual and Reproductive 
Health and Rights 
In 2021, women’s rights should not be up for debate. Yet 
the Conservatives want to roll back abortion access. 
Meanwhile, anti-choice organizations are actively working 
to spread misinformation about abortion, putting the 
health and safety of young people and vulnerable women 
at risk.
Everyone in Canada should have the information they 
need to freely make decisions over their own bodies and
have access to the medical care and services that are their 
legal rights. And no one should be able to withhold access 
to care. 
A re-elected Liberal government will:
• Establish regulations under the Canada Health Act
governing accessibility for sexual and reproductive 
health services so there is no question, that no 
matter where someone lives, that they have access 
to publicly available sexual and reproductive health
services. Failure on the part of a province to meet
this standard would result in an automatic penalty 
applied against federal health transfers.
• Provide up to $10 million to Health Canada to 
develop an easily accessible portal that provides 
accurate, judgement-free, and evidence-based 
information on sexual and reproductive health and 
rights, which will include a section that counters 
misinformation about abortion.
• Provide up to $10 million over 3 years to youth-led 
grassroots organizations that respond to the unique 
sexual and reproductive health needs of young 
people. 
• No longer provide charity status to anti-abortion 
organizations (for example, Crisis Pregnancy 
Centres) that provide dishonest counseling to 
women about their rights and about the options 
available to them at all stages of the pregnancy. 
Mental Health Care, for Everyone
In a typical year, 1 in 5 Canadians will experience a mental 
illness or addiction problem. And we know that over the 
last 18 months, nearly half of Canadians reported that 
their mental health worsened during the pandemic. 
Mental health is health. This is why we have made mental 
health a priority.
Key Actions to Support Mental Health, 
Since 2015
$5 billion to the provinces and territories to increase 
the availability of mental health care.
$500 million in support during the pandemic for 
Canadians experiencing mental health challenges, 
homelessness, or substance use.
Forward. For Everyone. 5
$598 million for a distinctions-based mental health and 
wellness strategy for First Nations, Métis, and Inuit, 
including for the Indian Residential Schools Health 
Supports Program and Crisis Line and Hope for 
Wellness Line.
$100 million for mental health interventions for 
populations disproportionately affected by COVID-19.
$140 million for supporting veterans’ mental health to 
cover costs related to PTSD, depressive and anxiety 
disorders.
$50 million for support to those at risk of COVID-19 
related trauma or post-traumatic stress disorder.
$45 million for the development of national mental 
health care standards.
Launched the Wellness Together portal, which has 
been accessed by more than 1.2 million users.
Invested more than $600 million to address the opioid 
crisis, including $182 million for the Substance and 
Addictions Program.
A Comprehensive Plan for Mental Health Care 
Across Canada
We need to ensure that mental health care is treated as a 
full and equal part of Canada’s universal public health care 
system. 
A re-elected Liberal government will:
• Establish a new federal transfer to provinces and 
territories—the Canada Mental Health Transfer—to 
assist jurisdictions to expand the delivery of highquality, accessible, and free mental health services. 
Building on the principles of universality and 
accessibility in the Canada Health Act, this transfer 
will help establish standards in each province and 
territory, so that Canadians are able to expect 
services that are timely, universal, and culturally 
competent. This will help each jurisdiction focus on 
and solve critical backlogs in service and provide 
help to those who need it, according to the unique 
needs in each region.
• Commit to permanent, ongoing funding for mental 
health services under the Canada Mental Health 
Transfer, with an initial investment of $4.5 billion 
over 5 years. Including the existing bilateral 
agreement on mental health services signed in 2017, 
this would bring federal support for mental health 
services to $2.5 billion per year by 2025-26. This is 
in addition to further investments we will make to 
support First Nations, Inuit and Métis communities 
with better access to trauma and mental health 
services.
• Undertake a comprehensive review of access to the 
Disability Tax Credit, CPP-Disability and other 
federal benefits and programs to ensure they are 
available to people experiencing mental health 
challenges.
• Include mental health as a specific element of 
occupational health and safety under the Canada 
Labour Code and require federally regulated
employers to take preventative steps to address 
workplace stress and injury.
• Fully fund a national, three-digit mental health crisis 
and suicide prevention hotline.
• Work with partners to ensure timely access to 
perinatal mental health services.
This funding will mean more access to psychologists, 
therapists, social workers, counselors, and other 
community supports. It will mean better care for children 
and youth, who have sacrificed so much this past year. 
And it will mean the millions of Canadians who struggle 
with their mental health—many of whom often don’t seek 
treatment—will be able to access the services they need.
Addressing Problematic Substance Use
The opioid overdose epidemic has worsened during the 
COVID-19 pandemic. Tragically, in 2020, there were 
6,214 opioid overdose deaths in Canada.
To save lives, we need a whole-of-society approach to the 
opioid epidemic that addresses the main causes and 
supports people who use drugs with the respect and 
dignity they deserve. We will continue to take an 
evidence-based approach to problematic substance use
and work with all orders of government to support 
innovative approaches so that Canadians have access to 
the care and support they need.
A re-elected Liberal government will:
• Introduce a comprehensive strategy to address 
problematic substance use to end the opioids crisis.
• Invest $25 million for public education to reduce the 
stigma associated with problematic substance use.
Forward. For Everyone. 6
• Invest $500 million to support the provinces and 
territories in providing access to a full-range of 
evidence-based treatment, recognizing that 
successful treatment is not determined by long-term 
abstinence.
• Support provinces and territories in creating 
standards for substance use treatment programs so 
that Canadians can access quality and evidencebased support when they need it most.
• Support the many lower-risk and first-time 
offenders by reforming the Criminal Code to repeal 
relevant mandatory minimum penalties and requiring 
police and Crown prosecutors to consider diverting 
individuals out of the criminal justice system.
Safer, Better Long-term Care
COVID-19 has tragically exposed long-standing issues 
affecting long-term care facilities across the country, and 
the frontline workers who care for residents. 
To build a better future for seniors and ensure tragedies 
like this never happen again, we need to make sure the 
conditions of work reflect the care standards our seniors 
deserve. That’s why we will work with provinces and 
territories, respecting their jurisdiction, to support seniors 
with an investment of $9 billion over 5 years to support 
safer conditions for seniors and improved wages and 
working conditions for personal support workers.
Safer Conditions in Homes
While the management of long-term care facilities is 
under provincial and territorial jurisdiction, we share the 
goal of ensuring safer, better care for seniors.
A re-elected Liberal government will: 
• Improve the quality and availability of long-term 
care homes and beds. 
• Implement strict infection prevention and control 
measures, including through more provincial and 
territorial facility inspections for long-term care 
homes.
• Develop a Safe Long-Term Care Act collaboratively to 
ensure that seniors are guaranteed the care they 
deserve, no matter where they live.
Better Working Conditions for Personal 
Support Workers
Better care requires better conditions for our frontline 
care workers. During the height of the pandemic last year,
we provided a wage boost for essential workers, including 
personal support workers. But we know temporary 
support is not enough. 
That’s why a re-elected Liberal government will continue 
working with the provinces and territories to:
• Raise wages for personal support workers, including 
a guaranteed minimum wage of at least $25 per 
hour.
• Train up to 50,000 new personal support workers. 
Protecting Public Health
Throughout the pandemic, we have put public health first. 
Canadians have adjusted every step of the way, and 
together we have found new and better ways to fight this 
virus. We recognize that, when this passes, we have a 
responsibility to review the federal response to COVID-19
and ensure that the lessons we have learned underpin our 
pandemic preparedness in the future. But there are things 
we can do now to keep Canadians safe as we finish the 
fight.
Safer Indoor Air
A government’s highest responsibility is to keep Canadians 
safe. Proper ventilation, that exchanges indoor air for 
outdoor air, is an important tool for preventing the spread 
of COVID-19. As Canada re-opens and the days get a little 
colder, we need to make sure our indoor spaces are 
properly ventilated, so students can get back in the 
classroom and businesses can welcome customers. We 
have a plan to make this future a reality.
That’s why a re-elected Liberal government will:
• Provide a $100 million top-up to the Safe Return to 
Class Fund for ventilation improvement projects 
across Canada, as well as $10 million for First 
Nations to improve indoor air quality in on-reserve 
schools.
• Provide $100 million to the Canada Healthy 
Communities Initiative with $70 million of this 
funding directed to a new pillar focused on 
increasing air quality and indoor ventilation.
• Introduce a tax credit for small businesses to make it 
easier for them to invest in better ventilation.
10 Days of Paid Sick Leave
Too many Canadians do not have proper paid sick leave 
and that can force them into a dilemma of going to work 
sick or not having enough money to put food on the table. 
No one should have to make this kind of choice.
Within 100 days, a re-elected Liberal government will:
• Introduce amendments to the Canada Labour Code
to provide 10 days of paid sick leave for all federally
regulated workers so that no one has to choose 
between going to work sick or paying their bills.
Forward. For Everyone. 7
• Convene provinces and territories to develop a 
national action plan to legislate sick leave across the 
country, while respecting provincial-territorial 
jurisdiction and the unique needs of small business 
owners. 
Helping Teachers and School kids
This year has underscored just how important our schools 
and educators are. They make sure our children are
engaged and thriving. Proper nutrition is also critical to 
creating successful learning environments.
Support for Teachers
Teachers in Canada go above and beyond for their 
students, often paying out of pocket. In 2016, we created 
the Eligible Educator School Supply Tax Credit to address 
this. During the pandemic, they showed time and time 
again the lengths they would go at their own expense, to 
ensure children are learning.
A re-elected Liberal government will:
• Increase the refundable tax credit to 25% (from 
15%).
• Expand eligibility criteria to include tech devices and 
ensure that teaching supplies purchased to perform 
employment duties are eligible, no matter where 
that may be.
School Nutrition and Healthy Eating
Children need healthy, nutritious food to grow and learn. 
Currently over 3 million children in Canada are living 
without guaranteed access to nutritious school meals. 
A re-elected Liberal government will:
• Work with our provincial, territorial, municipal, 
Indigenous partners, and stakeholders to develop a 
National School Food Policy and work towards a 
national school nutritious meal program with a 
$1 billion dollar investment over five years. 
• Introduce new restrictions on the commercial 
marketing of food and beverages to children and 
establish new front-of-package labelling to promote 
healthy food choices